[A] history of Israel which is not in some measure
also a history of her faith is neither significant nor possible."

INTRODUCTION TO JOHN BRIGHT’S

A HISTORY OF ISRAEL

William P. Brown

History MArrers! This motto captures well the sum and substance of John Bright s
textbook. For at least twenty-seven years, A History of Israel was a standard text among mainline
theological schools and seminaries across the country, Its influence on previous and present
generations of theology students is inestimable. Translated into German, Spanish, Korean, and
Indonesian, Bright s magisterial work continues to be widely used, having achieved a total sale of
over 100,000 copies since the publication of its first edition in 1959.

The reasons for the textbook’s success are clear. The facility with which Bright engaged
scripture, archaeology, and ancient Near Easter history remains unsurpassed within the genre.
Bright’s critical confidence in the historical texture of biblical tradition made his work useful not
only for the study of ancient history but also for the study of Old Testament literature. Most
significantly, Bright took seriously Israel’s theological formation; he regarded Israel's faith as a
determinative factor in shaping its identity in history. Bright’s focus on Israel’s faith, more
broadly, indicated his conviction that history constitutes the arena of revelation and theology.
Finally, Bright’s lively writing style makes for stimulating reading.

For all that recent scholars have considered methodologically flawed and theologically
biased (see Appendix), the strength of Bright s textbook lies in its power to provoke theological
reflection from within the field of historical inquiry. Even a recent detractor of Bright’s method
admits that this classic continues to set the standard against which the next generation of
textbooks can be measured.”” Owing to its wide coverage of historical data and biblical material,
as well as its theological vision, Bright s textbook remains an exemplar in the genre of history
writing.

A. BRIGHT BEHIND THE TEXTBOOK

John Bright received his theological training at the place where he was to hold his only
full-time teaching position, Union Theological Seminary in Virginia. Born

1 John Bright, Early Israel in Recent History Writing: A Study in Method (London: SCM Press,
1956), p.21

Kurt L. Noll, “Looking on the Bright Side of Israels History: Is There Pedagogical Value in a
Theological Presentation of History?” ( Biblical Interpretation, 7 [1999] p.27).
