10 — INTRODUCTION

recourse to military force (1.123). Despite his confidence in the conquest model, Bright already
offers in his first edition a nuanced picture that affirms the complexity and diversity of Israel’s
occupation of the land.

Bright’s discussion of the historical complexities of the exodus and occupation of the land
serves to frame a theologically central theme explored in chapter 4, the “constitution and faith of
early Israel.” Polity and theology meet here for the first and most propitious time. The tribal
league, or twelve-tribe confederation (Martin Noth’s “amphictyony” in Bright’s first edition),
constituted for Bright Israel’s most theologically legitimate social structure: “amphictyony did
not create [Israel’s] faith; on the contrary, faith was constitutive of the amphictyony” (1.128). The
tribal league existed as a “covenant society,” a direct outgrowth of its faith. Covenant embodied
the very essence of Israel’s existence as the unique people of God, yet not without international
precedent (1.132). The formal contours of Israel’s relationship with God find a clear parallel in
the suzerainty treaties of the Hittite Empire of the Middle Bronze Age. For Bright, such a
precedent indicates the antiquity of Israel’s covenant, traceable back to the “Mosaic age” (1.134).
But more than that, the covenant form testifies to the enduring link between the historical mem-
ory of deliverance and its legal stipulations.

Together, election and covenant, exodus and Sinai, defined Israel’s identity. While
historical memory of the exodus cast Israel’s covenant as an expression of ‘prevenient favor”
(1.136), covenant safeguarded the very goal of Israel’s deliverance from bondage: acceptance of
YHWH’s kingship. This dialectic, as it were, between grace and law, established at the summit of
Sinai, is set against the patriarchal covenant, which rests solely on “unconditional promises for
the future, in which the believer was obligated only to trust” (1.135). For Bright, these two
covenantal traditions effected a tension that was to pervade much of Israel’s history, the tension
between promise and obedience, between the past and the future. Whereas the “God of the
Patriarchs was based on the personal, kinship ties of sojoumers, the sovereign God of the
covenant, YHWH, demanded sole allegiance from a fully constituted community (1.140—141).

Out of historical and theological necessity, Bright finds Israel’s religion and tribal
structure firmly established well before its occupation of the land. Historically, a conquest model
of Israelite occupation would necessitate “a sizeable confederation” (1.145). Theologically,
“[elarly Israel was neither a racial nor a national unity, but a confederation of clans united in
covenant with Yahweh” (1.143). Drawing heavily from the work of Martin Noth and the Book of
Judges, Bright confidently depicts Israel’s tribal-league structure centered around a common
sanctuary, “the throne of the invisible Yahweh,” at Shiloh, a precursor to the “tent-shrine of
David” (1.146). Such was Israel’s most credible institution, whose origins reach back to Sinai.

But it was not to last. Due to the external crisis of Philistine incursion, Israel had to
survive by another means. By fits and starts, Israel underwent an irreversible transformation.
Bright considers the books of Samuel and Kings, including the
