INTRODUCTION — I1

“matchless ‘History of the Throne Succession,” the closest thing to eyewitness reporting in
scripture. “We are, in short, better informed about this period than any comparable one in Israel's
history” (1.163). Focusing on the figures of Saul and David, Bright dramatically recounts the
painful wrenchings of a theocracy caught between its theological heritage and outside pressures
that threatened to bring Israel into the fold of the pagan nations. Bright’s sympathies lie not with
David but with Samuel, who “labored to keep the ancient tradition alive” (1.166),

The charismatic David ushers in a period of imperial expansion for Israel, “no longer
merely a nation of small farmers” (1.202). “Israel was no longer a tribal confederacy . . . but a
complex empire organized under the crown” (1.183). David and his successor not only unified
Judah and northern Israel, albeit temporarily, they also “united the secular and the religious
community under the crown” (1.203). This curious statement appears to smack of anachronism
until one realizes that the “secular” for Bright denotes the centralization of power represented by
the monarchy (“state”). The Davidic-Solomonic empire effectively transformed a covenantal,
tribal society based on kinship bonds into a centralized political power, complete with its
attendant theological justifications, but not without great sacrifice. Although Solomon was able
to consolidate the empire, the “costs outran the income” (1.199). Putting an end to tribal
independence, the “burden of the monarchy” was too much to bear and the kingdom was torn
asunder: “Samuel renounced Saul and broke him; but it was Solomon who broke Abiathar!”
(1.203).

Although problematic in Bright’s view, the theological underpinnings of the monarchy
reach back to the patriarchal covenant, which articulated God’s unconditional promises for the
future. Amplified by kingship ideology, the promise-oriented covenant of Israel's ancestors came
to set itself in tension with the Sinaitic covenant. With the secession of northern Israel, this
tension manifested itself in various forms throughout Judah's and Israel's joint histories.
Northern Israel's secession was a failed attempt to reactivate the tribal-league tradition in
reaction to Jerusalem's imperialism. The clash between the ethos of the amphictyony, embodied
by particular prophets, and the desire for dynastic stability remained irresolvable in the north. By
contrast, Judah’s internally stable history, ruled by dynastic succession, makes for “dull reading”
(1.219).

Historically and theologically, Bright reads the classical prophets of the eighth century as
reformers, whose aim was to “reawaken memory of the now largely forgotten Sinaitic covenant,”
rejecting both the “blood, soil, and cult” of resurgent paganism and the unconditional covenant
of promise that was the theological pillar of the monarchy (1.247). The prophets pointed to a new
vision of life before God that both Israel and Judah, as separate monarchies, could not sustain
politically or theologically on their own. With northern Israel dead and Judah dying, the only
signs of life left were two monarchs who attempted to walk the road back to Sinai, as it were, but
without lasting success: Hezekiah and Josiah. The prescriptive force of the Mosaic covenant
came to be suppressed by the Davidic covenant with its unconditional promises to the monarchy.
By typecasting the latter, Bright comes

