12 — INTRODUCTION

close to claiming that the Davidic covenant was bereft of moral potency (1.278). The credibility
of Isaiah's theology, for example, rests on a fusion of Davidic theology, stripped of its
nationalistic tendencies, and the covenantal theology of Sinai. By injecting a strong moral note,
the prophet represents the only hope of finding a rapprochement between Davidic rule and the
Sinaitic covenant (1.278-279, 311). Deuteronomy, with its catenation of Mosaic law rooted in
the tribal league, offers Judah its last chance for salvation. Josiah’s dramatic repentance signals
for Bright how far the monarchy—a fool’s paradise —had veered away from Israel's true
identity, shaped at Sinai (1.300). Yet even Josiah’s reform failed, due not so much to the
historical vicissitudes that resulted in his untimely death as to the regnant covenant of David, to
which the Sinai covenant became its “handmaid” (1.302).

The exile, according to Bright, struck a fatal blow to the theology of the monarchy. The
tenacity of Israels faith, tested in the crucible of captivity, came to rest exclusively on law.
While Bright discerns, for example, the note of promise that rings loud and clear in Second
Isaiah, his emphasis falls heavily upon the prophet’s sense of moral obligation (1.339). The
figure of the Servant in Isaiah embodies the life of humble obedience, the very essence of divine
redemption, reflected also by the one “who was crucified and who rose again” (1.341),
Similarly, the hope for Israels restoration depended not on the reestablishment of the Davidic
throne, but on the Torah. With Nehemiah and Ezra meticulously placed chronologically (see
Excursus II), reversing the biblical order, civil order had to be established first before Ezra,
armed with a copy of the law, could embark on his reforming mission to reinvigorate the
religious community. Ezra was, in effect, Moses redivivus, Lacking national, ethnic, and even
cultic identity, Israel was able to salvage its Mosaic heritage, covenantal law.

The final period of Israel’s history, or more properly “Old Testament history” (from Ezra
to the Maccabean revolt), is as dark and distant as its early history, Bright finds. And like Israel's
earliest stage, this last period also has its literary hero, Daniel, who enjoins resistance and
obedience to Torah, the clarion call of the Hasidim (1.408-409). With the purification of the
Temple, the “end of the Old Testament period” draws to a close as Jews find a measure of
“religious freedom and political autonomy” (1.412).

The final chapter affords Bright the opportunity to step back and reflect on what has
survived, historically and theologically, at the close of Old Testament history. Although
coexistent with the rebuilt Temple, the law promulgated through Moses and Ezra proved to be
the enduring identity marker of Judaism. Exalted and absolutized, the Torah helped to shape a
new community out of the ashes of national humiliation and defeat. But it came at a cost: “Law
virtually usurped the place of the historical covenant as the basis of faith” (1.427). By severing
its ties to the “events of exodus and Sinai, law, in effect, was divested of its historical
connectionalism, and legalism, consequently, raised its ugly head, according to Bright (1.426-
427). As a counterbalance, however, a developed notion of hope, expressed

