INTRODUCTION — 13

through eschatology and apocalypticism, emerged in early Judaism. Superseding the Messianic
hope for restoring Israel’s glorious past, this hope pointed to a new age in which history itself
would be consummated (1.442443). Its pattern was rooted not in the Davidic monarchy but in
the Day of YHWH.

Looking toward the future, Bright introduces his final observations in an epilogue, in
which he poses the question, “Whither Israel?” (1.448). In Judaism, Israel’s history continues
beyond the Old Testament “to the present day” (1.447). “Old Testament theology finds its
fruition” in the Talmud, even though Israel’s hope remains unfulfilled (1.452). For Bright,
another, specifically Christian, answer is given, one that does not fell the tree on which the
branch was grafted (Rom. 11:17), but is “likewise historically legitimate, ” namely, “Christ and
his gospel” (1.452). Both the “righteousness that fulfills the law and the sufficient fulfillment of
Israel’s hope in all its variegated forms” are found in Christ (1.452). For all that Bright injects in
his historical analysis that is expressly Christian, he is careful not to promulgate a Christian
triumphalism over Jewish faith and practice:

Whither Israel's history? It is on this question, fundamentally, that the Christian and his
Jewish friend divide. Let us pray that they do so in love and mutual concern, as heirs of the
same heritage of faith who worship the same God, who is Father of us all (1.452-453).

Both Jews and Christians, Bright acknowledges, figure decisively in the drama of
redemption that begins with Israel's unique history.”

2. The Second Edition (1972). Thirteen years of new discoveries and scholarly argu-
mentation transpired between Bright's original publication and his second edition. From royal
stelae to the Mari tablets, more extrabiblical texts were coming under scholarly scrutiny.’* In
addition, standard models of historical reconstruction were increasingly being questioned as new
theories were forcefully emerging. Bright made a concerted effort to cover it all, frequently
standing firm on his initial convictions, but often making adjustments and occasionally
overhauling some of his most fundamental perspectives, while all the time resisting the
“temptation to expand the book” (2.15). But expand he did in certain areas, particularly in his
Excursus on Sennacherib’s two campaigns against Judah (1.282-287; 2.296-308). More
vigorous in argumentation and yet more tentative in his conclusions, his

23. Bright's resistance against adopting a stance of Christian supercessionism is, | think, also
reflected in the concern he registers regarding the Davidic covenant superseding the Mosaic during the
rise of the monarchy (1.272; see also 2.287; 3.289).

24 That some of Albright’s students were Jewish (¢.g., Nelson Glueck, Avraham Biran, and
Harry Orlinsky), on whose scholarship Bright relied, no doubt influenced Bright’s own theological
sensitivities.

25 Among the new discoveries, Bright specifically cites the Adad-nirari stela, published in 1968
(2.252n, 72) and the Hebrew ostracon found at Mesad Hasavyahu (Yabneh-Yam), published in 1962
(2.316).

