14 — INTRODUCTION

discussion of this thorny issue practically doubled the length of its parallel in the first edition.

a. Holding Firm. Despite growing scholarly opinion to the contrary, Bright does not
relax his hold, for example, on the claim that the “cultic credos” in Deuteronomy 6, 26, and
Joshua 24 reach back to the “earliest period of Israel’s life in Palestine” (2.72n. 12). More
significant for dating the patriarchs, Bright continues to rely on the allegedly parallel evidence
found in the Nuzi texts for the patriarchal customs described in Genesis. Indeed, the second
edition expands the scope of his argument by also including parallels outside the Nuzi corpus
(2.79). All this is marshaled against a rising tide of criticism that questioned the second-
millennium distinctiveness of such parallels (2.252n. 72; 316).

In addition to the Nuzi parallels, Bright finds the Mari texts lending indirect evidence for
the antiquity of the patriarchs. Irrespective of their lack of reference to customs reflected in the
patriarchal narratives (!), the Mari texts, Bright claims, are useful for demonstrating that Israel’s
ancestors mediated certain Mesopotamian traditions, including prophecy, law, and the classic
mythopoeic or epic traditions (2.87). Compared to the first edition, the patriarchs of the second
edition, as dyed-in-the-wool Amorites, bear the increasingly heavy load of transmitting the best
of Mesopotamian culture to what would later become Israel.

To demonstrate the antiquity of the covenant form against claims to the contrary, Bright
enumerates the Hittite treaties in greater detail in his second edition and contrasts them with later
Assyrian and Aramean treaty forms that lack the crucial component of the historical prologue
(2.148-149).® The stress on history within the covenant formulary points to the larger issue of
Israel’s distinctive faith. Quoting almost verbatim from his first edition, Bright maintains the
claim that “{t]he ancient paganism lacked any sense of a divine guidance toward a goal,” despite
the seminal work of Bertil Albrektson, who discerned developed notions of divine guidance from
much of the ancient Near Eastern corpus (2.15Sn. 41). At best, this mark of Israel’s faith is
distinctive only by degree rather than by category. Yet Bright holds firm without giving an inch
toward a more balanced or nuanced perspective.

Another point at which Bright holds firm is the Amorite pedigree of the patriarchs.
Compared to the first edition, the relationship between Amorites and Arameans is one that Bright
delineates with greater vigor. By identifying the patriarchs with the Amorites, Bright must
seriously wrestle with the allegedly ancient “cultic confession” that claims Aramean descent for
Israel’s ancestors (Deut. 26:5). This leads him to identify the Amorites of Syria-Palestine as
“proto-Arameans, a

26 Bright’s foil is D. J. McCarthy, Treaty and Covenant (Analecta Biblica 21; Rome: Pontifical
Biblical Institute, 1963), who argues for a seventh-century terminus a quo for the concept of covenant in
biblical tradition. Regarding the contrast between Hittite and Aramean covenant forms, Bright
acknowledges one possible exception (see 2.148-149n. 26).

27 B. Albrektson, History and the Gods (ConBOT 1; Lund: Gleerup, 1967).
