INTRODUCTION — 15

new formulation for Bright. In so doing, Bright is able to avoid charging the biblical witness with
rampant anachronism (2.89-90; cf. 1.81-82). Bright also maintains without change his stance on
the archaeological evidence from Jericho and Ai during the conquest period (see above). Finally,
Bright maintains the historical integrity of the prophetic narratives of 1 Kings 20 and 22, despite
mounting suspicion that these narratives are better ascribed to the Jehu dynasty (2.239n. 45).

b. Minor Adjustments. Although Bright strictly follows Albright’s datings for the events
within the period of the divided monarchy, he makes slight adjustments in the chronology of the
ancient Near Eastern empires, from Sumerian to Egyptian. More significantly, Bright is less
confident in using the loaded term “amphictyony” to describe Israel’s tribal league in light of the
less than congruent sociopolitical parallels of Greek antiquity (2.158n. 45; 159n, 48). “Tribal
league” and “tribal confederacy” replace Martin Noth’s original designation, although an
occasional “amphictyonic tradition” slips through. Unabated is Bright's zeal to demonstrate that
Israel’s tribal order reflects the ethos of covenantal tradition, as indelibly recorded in Joshua 24.

New discoveries and interpretations of existing archaeological sites also prompt Bright to
acknowledge, for example, that Ezion-geber was not ‘the largest [copper] refinery so far known
in the ancient Orient” and the hub of Solomon’s industrial commerce (1.195), but a fortress or
storehouse (2.211-212). Also, in light of the work of Israeli archaeologist Yigael Yadin, Bright is
compelled to attribute the “stables at Megiddo” no longer to Solomon but to Omri, a century
later. Moreover, in light of critical evidence Bright acknowledges that Albright’s equation of
Geba with Gebeah in 1 Kings 15:22 is cast in doubt (2.231n. 23; cf. 1.216n. 24).

c. Major Adjustments. In view of Bright’s staunch resistance to certain lines of
scholarship that emerged since the first publication of his textbook, his incorporation of other
new insights may seem remarkable. Less reliance, for example, on Nelson Glueck’s study of the
“nomad’s land” of Southern Transjordan, a benchmark for establishing the terminus a quo of
Israel’s conquest, is telling in the light of emerging evidence of modest settlements in the Middle
and Late Bronze Age (2.54n. 16).

Such adjustment, however, pales in comparison to Bright’s revision of the conquest
model he so vigorously presented in the first edition. In a provocative 1962 article, George E.
Mendenhall reconceptualized Israel’s conquest and thereby set a new direction in reconstructing
Israel's early history.** Simply put, Mendenhall argued that Israel’s conquest was primarily an

“inside job,” a peasants’ revolt (2.133n, 69;134) . A violent convulsion of western Palestine is, to
a degree, still maintained, but now Israel “conquered from within” those towns in central
Palestine listed as Israel's. With Mendenhall, Bright endorses a scenario in which indigenous
Hebrews “may simply have risen against their ruler ... and taken control without significant
fighting or general bloodshed” (2.139).

28 G. E. Mendenhall, “The Hebrew Conquest of Palestine” (BA, 25 [1962], p.66-87).
