16 —INTRODUCTION

The picture of disaffected “peasants” rising against their urban overlords paints a socially
stratified landscape for Israel’s emergence that was absent in Bright's first edition. Bright revels
in describing the feudal nature of Canaan's city-states, characterized by “endless quarrels
between city lords,” the virtual disappearance of the middle class, and the exploitation of “poor
villagers,” all new observations in his second edition (2.135). Slaves, abused peasants, and ill-
paid mercenaries, united in their economic plight, “became Hebrews” (2.135). Although Bright
acknowledged in his first edition some continuity between the indigenous Hebrews who, as
Apiru, were ready to make “common cause” with the erstwhile slaves of Egypt, he can now
portray through Mendenhall’s model a society ‘rotten from within, poised to explode at the
slightest spark (2.135).

That spark had to come from Egypt; otherwise the Bible’s unanimity regarding the
exodus tradition and the centrality of the Sinai covenant would be discounted.”” The conquest, in
short, was a movement from within and without. Hence, Bright’s subheading “conquest and
absorption” in the first edition is changed to “conquest and fusion” (1.126; 2.137), indicating a
more formative role for the indigenous populace. For the beleaguered slaves from Egypt, there
was ready and willing assistance from their brethren in Palestine. With such a scenario, Bright is
able to maintain a “conquest” without the need to demonstrate a ubiquity of thirteenth-century
destruction layers. At any rate, Joshua still wins!

Despite revised details and changes in historical perspective, Bright’s second edition
keeps its theological agenda on the straight and narrow. The Davidic and Sinaitic covenants
continue to clash, the latter constituting Israel's true and originative nature, the former regarded
as an innovation. Indeed, the contrast is even more sharply cast in the second edition: YHWH’s.
“eternal covenant with David” not only “superseded” the ancient Mosaic covenant (1.272), it
“obscured” it (2.287). Yet Bright nuances the connections he delineated in the first edition
between the Mosaic covenant and later developments in ‘Israel's life and conduct. The classical
prophets, for example, no longer represent “a reform movement . . . to reawaken memory of the
now largely forgotten Sinaitic covenant” (1.247). They are now “representatives in a new setting
of an office” that “stood in continuity with the charismatic leadership of the Judges” and whose
duty was to “criticize and correct the state” (2.262).*° The prophets are politicized to a degree
not found in Bright’s first edition. Moreover, the discovery of Deuteronomic law is no longer
simply a “reactivation” of the Sinai covenant (1.300); it is also “recognized as the basic law of
the

29 Asacounterbalance to Mendenhall’s thesis, Bright adds in his second edition certain caveats
to affirm that Israel’s “nucleus” was in Egypt and that Sinai was constitutive of later Israel (2.135-136;
cf. 1.125).

30 Nowhere in this paragraph, in contrast to that of the first edition, is mention made of the
“Sinaitic” or “Mosaic covenant.” This, however, does not imply that Bright decided to forego any
connection between the prophets and Sinai ~ “covenant” is still mentioned. Rather, Bright is more
concerned with highlighting the political role the prophets played in relation to the monarchy.
