18 — INTRODUCTION

names found among the Israelites and their ancestors” (3.37). The payoff in pressing the Ebla
texts into service for reconstructing Israel’s prehistory is to open the possibility that Abraham
can be dated as far back as the third millennium (3.44n. 45). Bright even finds the Ebla texts
offering a possible solution to the historically problematic incident of Abraham’s military
engagement with the five cities of the Plain, recorded in Genesis 14 (3.84). Given its preliminary
state, Bright admits that current research on the Ebla tablets is too tentative to be of much use. *
Nevertheless, the power of suggestion has its own rhetorical value. For Bright, the tantalizing
realm of the possible makes up for the lack of hard evidence. Moreover, the connection between
the Prologue—an arguably dispensable element in the textbook genre of Israelite history—and
Israel's “prehistory” is strengthened.

The suggestive force of the Ebla texts, however, does not sway Bright from keeping
Abraham in the Middle Bronze Age. The Nuzi parallels of the second millennium remain in
force, despite gathering opposition regarding their relevance to the biblical text.’ In the mid-
1970s, T. L. Thompson and John Van Seters vigorously questioned the historicity of the
patriarchal narratives by demonstrating that the Nuzi parallels were not unique to the second
millennium and were well in effect into the first millennium (3.72n. 12; 80n. 27). In response,
Bright comes to rely more on internal than on external evidence. He finds the lack of similarity
between later Israelite law and the patriarchal customs within the biblical material to be
sufficient for establishing the “tenacity of historical memory” (3.75). However, in light of the
biblical claim of Aramean descent for the patriarchs and of the fact that certain patriarchal
names are found in first-millennium texts (3.78), that “historical memory” is getting shorter by
each edition! Bright, thus, is compelled to concede that a substantial portion of the patriarchal
narratives has its provenance in the Late Bronze Age (3.86-87).

In addition to the temporal context, the material and social context in which the
patriarchs sought their livelihood has changed remarkably for Bright. No longer are they the
nomads of the desert but pastoralists who “pursued a semi-sedentary existence” before gradually
settling down (3.54). No longer are they “ass nomads” (Albright’s term), but “seminomadic
breeders of sheep and other small cattle whose beast of burden was the ass” (3.81). In their
mode of life, the patriarchs represented an essential segment of a “dimorphic” society, which
included mutual relations with agricultural villagers (3.81), Indeed, like the diverse makeup of
the “conquering” Hebrews, Israel’s ancestors did not come “originally from any one place”
(3.90). Nevertheless, as Egypt constitutes the locus for the “true” Israel, so Mesopotamia
remains the true origin of Israel s ancestors, all Amorites they were (3.90).

As for the conquest itself, the archaeological evidence continues to prove less helpful.
“[The] evidence, impressive though it is, is at many points ambiguous, even

32. Ebla does not appear in the chronological chart for the Early Bronze Age (3.466).
33 In the face of mounting criticism, Bright concedes that the “force of these parallels must not
be exaggerated” (3,80), in contrast to his more confident parallel statement in the previous edition (2.79).

