INTRODUCTION — 19

confusing, and it is not always easy to correlate it with the Biblical narrative.” Bright admits
(3.129; cf. 2.126-127). The list of discrepant archaeological sites increases significantly in the
third edition. Bright holds out the possibility that these sites may indicate instances of “an
internal uprising” against urban overlords. Indeed, the “destruction of towns might well have
been the exception rather than the rule” (3.132). Moreover, the archaeological evidence
indicates a protracted affair that spans the patriarchal era up to the time of the early monarchy
(3.132-133). Consequently, Bright is tempted to emend his position of a thirteenth-century con-
quest by lowering it a century (3.133n. 68). But questions of dating notwithstanding, Bright
holds firm that of the various models proposed by scholarship, the conquest model is still the
most useful for reconstructing Israel’s occupation. For Bright, “conquest” has come to mean
both invasion and indigenous uprising. What has not changed is his conviction that the process
involved “a bitter struggle and a major political and socioeconomic upheaval” (3.133).

As the third edition reflects Bright’s concerted efforts to incorporate new data and to
stake out a more balanced position in the face of alternative theories, it also marks the apex of
Bright’s theological reflections. Amid increasing uncertainty regarding the material contours of
Israel’s early history, Bright’s theological position comes to the fore with greater vigor in
chapter 4. While his foils remain the same (e.g., evolutionary development of religion,
retrojection of late beliefs on earlier traditions, bloodless abstractions, and henotheism), Bright
significantly modifies his manner of presentation. Section headings are changed and arguments
rearranged and supplemented to yield a more powerful, if not elegant, presentation of the faith
that constituted Israel. Joshua, for example, no longer speaks of “Yahweh's gracious deeds”
(2.146), but of “the magnalia Dei" (3.149). Bright forcefully states at the outset that the heart of
Israel’s faith lies in its covenantal relationship with YHWH. Israel’s faith cannot be
recapitulated as a series of beliefs; it is captured, rather, in the dialectic between divine election
and covenantal obligation (3.144).

Bright places greater weight on the antiquity and religious world of Israel's early poetry
(3.146). The Song of Miriam and the Song of Deborah, both of the twelfth century, establish an
intrinsic link between the exodus and Sinai. As the ancient credos were for Gerhard von Rad the
pillars for supporting the antiquity of Heilsgeschichte (at the expense of covenantal faith!), so
these early poems were regarded by Bright as indicative of establishing the historical integrity of
Israel’s covenantal faith.

By holding firm to the antiquity of the Mosaic covenant, Bright plows through a rising
tide of German scholarship that finds covenant theology to be a relatively late invention (3.153n.
27). Although Bright acknowledges, in light of fresh evidence, some degree of similarity
between the Hittite treaties of the second millennium and those of later Assyrian and Syrian
provenance, his original conclusions remain

34. In addition to the works of Perlitt and Kutsch, cited 3.153n. 27, see more recently Emest W.
Nicholson, God and His People: Covenant and Theology in the Old Testament (Oxford/New York:
Clarendon/Oxford University Press, 1988).
