2. — INTRODUCTION

in Chattanooga, Tennessee, and reared in the Presbyterian Church U.S., Bright earned his B.D.
at Union in 1931, Teaching biblical languages, Bright spent the next four years at his alma
mater to earn a Th.M. degree. Betraying little interest in history, his thesis, “A Psychological
Study of the Major Prophets” (1933), helped to cultivate a lifelong interest in the prophets.

The winter of 1931-32 proved significant for Bright's career. Dr. Melvin G. Kyle of
Pittsburg-Xenia Seminary, a guest lecturer at Union, met the young Bright and offered him the
opportunity to accompany him on the fourth and final archaeological campaign at Tell Beit
Mirsim, led by William Foxwell Albright of Johns Hopkins University. There Bright met the
renowned Albright, of whom he was in “complete awe,” ° and his research career began to be
mapped. He joined Albright again in Palestine on the 1935 dig at Bethel, during which his
mentor proffered a solution to an intractable archaeological problem (see below).° John Bright
and G. Ernest Wright there became known as “the Gold-dust Twins.” 7 In the fall of that year,
Bright entered the doctoral program at Johns Hopkins University to study under Albright and
was introduced to a new and distinctly American approach to biblical research.* Albright was
single-handedly transforming the focus and method of biblical research at the time Bright
became his student.

Albright was like a father to John Bright, as he was to many of his students. When
Bright decided to drop out of the program because of insufficient funds and difficulties with
the rigors of philological training, Albright graciously offered him a loan, which Bright could
not bring himself to accept.’ An effective preacher, Bright had for some time felt called to
parish ministry, and he accepted the call to be the assistant pastor of First Presbyterian Church
in Durham, North Carolina. But it did not last. Bright soon found himself once again wrestling
with the complexities of

3. In his later years, Bright preferred that the work be thrown out of Union’s library (Kendig
B. Cully, “Interview with John Bright: Scholar of the Kingdom” /The Review of Books and Religion,
11/4 (1983) p.4)).

4 See John Bright, Jeremiah: A Commentary (AB 21; Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1965).
While affirming Israelite prophecy as a unique phenomenon historically, Bright appreciated Jeremiah
also from a broadly existential perspective (see pp.xv, cxi-cxii). In addition, Bright's last monograph,
apart from the third edition of his textbook, focuses upon the theological and moral insights of the
eighth- and seventh-century prophets: Covenant and Promise: The Prophetic Understanding of the
Future in Pre-Exilic Israel (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1976).

5 Leona G. Running and David Noel Freedman, William Foxwell Albright: A Twentieth-
Century Genius (New York: Morgan, 1975) p.162.

6 Ibid, pp.187-188.

7 Ibid., p.186.

8 Albright referred to the revolution in biblical research that he had sparked as the “Baltimore
Schoo!” in order to deflect attention from himself (/bid., p.198). Regarding the history of this “school,”
see Burke O. Long, Planting and Reaping Albright: Politics, Ideology, and Interpreting the Bible
(University Park, Penn.: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997) pp.15-70.

9° Running and Freedman, William Foxwell Albright, p.197.
