20 — INTRODUCTION

unscathed (3.153). While “[tJhe antiquity of the covenant form in Israel cannot be proved”
(3.155), Bright remains convinced of a second-millennium dating for the covenantal tradition,
although it is conveyed through an unfortunate typographical error: “the Biblical covenant is far
closer in form and in spirit to the Hittite treaties of the first (sic!) millennium than to any later
treaties presently known to us” (3.154).

Avoiding, as in the second edition, the Nothian nomenclature of “amphictyony,” Bright
continues to stress the covenantal contours of Israel s tribal society (3.163). New to the
discussion, however, is Bright's stress upon the ethos of kinship, which denotes not so much
blood ties as “social solidarity, a feeling of closeness” (3.163). Despite Israel’s heterogeneous
origins, “speaking theologically, one might with justice call Israel a family” (3.163). Israel’s
historical unity, thus, ultimately rests on its faith rather than on ethnicity. In making his case,
Bright is able to integrate more fully in his last edition the familial ethos of patriarchal religion
and that of Mosaic Yahwism.**

D. THE CENTER OF BRIGHTS HISTORY

The development of historical research since the heyday of Bright’s work has yielded a
significantly different picture from that depicted in the biblical narrative (see Appendix). To be
sure, Bright’s historical reconstruction differs at some significant points from the Bible’s own
historiography. But the move away from a primary reliance on the biblical witness among many
historians has fostered a radical skepticism that questions the very enterprise of writing Israel’s
history.° Such skepticism has grown proportionately in relation to the increasing tendency
among recent scholars to date much, if not most, of the biblical material to the Persian and even
Hellenistic periods. "As more texts are dated in post-exilic times, the more differentiated we
have to imagine the spectrum of Israel’s life, thinking, and belief in this time, ” *” and the less,
one must add, we can imagine any history at all. Naturally, the question has been raised whether
it is possible to write a history of Israel without reliance upon the Hebrew Bible.** If so, what
kind of history would we have? Bright, of course, would have considered the question absurd.
Understanding the message of the Old Testament was the raison d’étre for understanding
Israel's history.

All in all, Bright’s textbook is more than a work of historical reconstruction. It is a
robustly theological investigation. And for that Bright has been severely criticized.

35 For a fuller integration of kinship and covenant, see most recently Frank M. Cross, “Kinship
and Covenant” in his Epic Tradition of Early Israel: History and Literature in Ancient Israel (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998), pp.3~21

36 See the accessible summary of the recent research in Mark Zvi Brettler, The Creation of
History in Ancient Israel (London/New York: Routledge, 1995), pp.2-6.

37 Rolf Rendtorff, “The Paradigm Is Changing: Hope—and Fears” (Biblical Interpretation, |
[1993], p.48).

38 See J. Maxwell Miller, “Is it Possible to Write a History of Israel without Relying on the
Hebrew Bible?” in The Fabric of History: Text, Artifact and Israel's Past, ed. Diana V. Edelman
(JSOTSup 127; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1991), pp.93-102, who cogently argues that such
an enterprise, although theoretically possible, is well-nigh impossible in practice.

