INTRODUCTION — 21

Martin Noth’s review of Bright’s first edition sums it up well: “It is certainly a serious question
whether a presentation of Israel’s history could and should present a ‘Theology of the Old
Testament,’ at the same time. The question is not easily answered and cannot be solved by
interpolating references to the history of religion into a History of Israel.” Bright, however,
cannot be criticized for indiscriminately injecting his own “interpolations.” Considering himself
primarily a historian, Bright intended all along to convey his theological insights, subjected to
external controls, “at the right times and in the right way,” so as not to violate the integrity of
historical inquiry (E/, 29). Yet it must be observed that Noth’s caution anticipated the direction
historical research has taken since Bright's third edition. Like David uniting Judah and Israel,
but to no avail, Bright’s textbook facilitated an uneasy union between theology and history that
has not held among most historians today. Two histories, one biblical (Geschichte) and the other
the product of archaeology and sociological reconstruction (Historie), have for the time being
seemingly gone their separate ways. ” For Bright, however, genuine history and genuine
theology, as evidenced in Israel's faith, were one and the same.

Regardless of the pitfalls of integrating the history of religion and the “History of Israel,”
Bright would have it no other way. His coverage of the biblical material, including many of the
nonhistorical writings such as the psalms and the wisdom literature, is unmatched by others in
the genre. Bright gave serious attention to these corpora in order to illustrate the theological
tenor of the times. Indeed, in light of recent work, Bright's textbook is more an introduction to
the Old Testament presented in diachronic fashion than an aimless recitation of archaeological
and historical findings. For Bright, “history” was nothing less than the hermeneutical entry point
into the theology of the Old Testament. “History” was the template by which to set in relief
scripture’s rich complexity while underscoring its coherence and particularity. For Bright, it all
came down to one simple point: There is no authentic understanding of God without Israel’s
history, and there is no true understanding of Israel's history without God.

Bright’s textbook attempts to balance these two fundamental convictions. On the one
hand, Israel’s story is no imaginative construct severed from the harsh realities of historical
experience. The Bible is about a particular people who embodied a peculiar history. For all its
ambiguity, archaeology anchors Israel's story in history.*' Moreover, the archaeological picture
underscores the social and theological struggles the ancient community faced as it developed
those traditions that came to

39. Martin Noth, “As One Historian to Another” (Interpretation, 15 [1961], pp.65~66. The same,
however, could be said of Noth in his reconstruction of the “sacral” ideas of amphictyonic Israel. See
Noth, The History of Israel, pp.85~138.

40 For a notable exception that Bright would have admired, at least in method, see Rainer
Albertz, A History of Israelite Religion in the Old Testament Period, Volumes 1, 2 (trans, John Bowden;
Louisville: Westminster/John Knox, 1994), esp. pp.13-17 of vol. 1.

41 See Bemhard W. Anderson’s suggestive essay, “The Relevance of Archaeology to Biblical
Theology: A Tribute to George Emest Wright,” in his Contours of Old Testament Theology
(Minneapolis: Fortress, 1999), pp.345-352.

