22 — INTRODUCTION

comprise scripture. On the other hand, Israel’s history cannot be severed from Israel s faith in the
God who delivered, sustained, and constituted Israel as a people. In short, a “satisfying picture”
of Israel's history is a history whose horizons can-not be “foreshortened either horizontally—
from the Stone Age to the “fullness of time” in Bright's case—or vertically by excluding the
ineffable.

Yet amid such broad horizons, Bright did not hesitate to identify what was central to
Israel’s faith and history. As any work in Old Testament theology worth its salt seeks to identify
an organizing principle within Israel’s theological purview, so Bright sought to determine the
driving force behind the history of Israel as a community of faith, The Mire, as it were, of
Bright’s account of Israel’s eventful history is—and has to be—found in his theological
perspective. In the end, it matters not whether Abraham's journeys took place in the Middle
Bronze, Late Bronze, or early Iron Age. What matters is that the patriarch’'s sojourn was an act of
faith, something that archaeology will never be able to verify or falsify.

As an ardent churchman, Bright recognized more than many in his generation the
significance of covenantal theology in Israel's formation and historical experience.** Resounding
through all three editions is his pronouncement: “Yahwism and covenant are coterminous!
(1.146; 2.160; 3.168). Beginning with an election of slaves, covenant served as Israel’s coat of
arms, later marred and tattered during the days of the monarchy, but preserved largely intact
throughout the ravages of exile and the disappointment of the restoration. Through covenantal
obedience, Israel strove to conduct itself coram Deo throughout the course of its history. But
when covenant was made immutable in later Judaism, ‘this meant a certain weakening of that
lively sense of history so characteristic of old Israel” (1.426; 2.442-443; 3.440). While Bright’s
assessment of Judaism verges on caricature,"’ it illustrates well his conviction that covenant, not
legalism, was constitutive of Israel’s identity. In covenant, Heilsgeschichte and Torah, mythos
and ethos, grace and duty embrace. In covenant, human history becomes a moral postulate.
Bright's “lively sense of history” provides the framework for a theology that enters into, rather
than floats above, the fray of human existence. Bright urged his own students never to forget that

“lively sense of history,” for it embodies the life of discipleship amid the tension between grace
and obligation, over and against the temptation of complacency.“ For a new generation of
students and professional interpreters, Bright demonstrates that not only does history matter, but
also theology.

42 The prominence of covenant in Bright's textbook has its theological parallel, not
coincidentally, in the monumental work of Walther Eichrodt, Theology of the Old Testament, 2 vols.
(OTL; Philadelphia: Westminster, 1961, 1967), originally published in 1933. For a recent covenantal
approach to Old Testament theology, see Bernhard W. Anderson, Contours of Old Testament Theology
(Minneapolis: Fortress, 1999).

43. See, e.g., E. P. Sanders, Paul and Palestinian Judaism: A Comparison of Patterns in Religion
(Philadelphia: Fortress, 1977); idem, Paul, the Law, and the Jewish People (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1983);
and most recently N. T. Wright, Christian Origins and the Question of God, Vol. 1: The New Testament
and the People of God (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1992).

44 See Bright, Covenant and Promise, p.198; and n, 4 above.

