Appendix

AN UPDATE IN THE SEARCH OF ISRAEL'S HISTORY

William P. Brown

MUCH HAS happened in the field of historical research since 1981. Brewing even before the
publication of the third edition of Bright’s textbook, nothing short of a crisis has beset the
discipline. As more material remains of Israel’s past have been uncovered, the leap from text to
trench has widened considerably. As a result, the integration of Palestine’s material culture with
the biblical witness of Israel's past—the traditional aim of biblical archaeology—can no longer
be sustained. Consequently, archaeological research in the Levant, known now as “Syro-
Palestinian archaeology” or sometimes “new archaeology,” has come into its own, severing
much of its ties to biblical studies.’ One can readily note the dramatic transformation of
archaeological research by comparing the following comments on the purpose of archaeology
for the biblical period.

[Archaeology] cannot explain the basic miracle of Israel’s faith, which remains a unique
factor in world history. But archaeology can help enormously in making the miracle
rationally plausible to an intelligent person whose vision is not shortened by a materialistic
world view.”

Such was William F, Albright’s vision of the worth and aim of biblical archaeology, a field of
inquiry that fell short of explaining Israel’s faith, yet could make that faith “rationally
plausible.” G. Emest Wright, similarly, contended that the driving force behind the discipline
was “the understanding and exposition of the Scriptures. Some thirty-seven years after
Wright’s influential work on biblical archaeology, one finds leading German archaeologist
Volkmar Fritz retaining the label “biblical archaeology,” but defining it with a decisively
different purpose:

1 William G. Dever points out that “Syro-Palestinian archaeology” was, in fact, an academic
discipline that ran parallel to “biblical archaeology” during the latter's heyday (‘“Biblical Theology and
Biblical Archaeology: An Appreciation of G. Emest Wright” /HTR, 73 (1980) p.15n. 34]. Nevertheless,
current archaeological work on the so-called “biblical” period of Syria-Palestine has undergone a
dramatic transformation by generally divorcing itself from the concern to demonstrate the historicity of
biblical traditions.

?W. F. Albright, The Archaeology of Palestine (London: Penguin Books, 1949), p.255.

3G. Emest Wright, Biblical Archaeology (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1957), p.17.

465
