466 A History OF ISRAEL — APPENDIX

Biblical archaeology is, just as the archaeology of other regions, a science aimed at regaining,
defining, and explaining the heritage of peoples formerly inhabiting the land, The task of
biblical archaeology is the exploration of the history and culture of Palestine.‘

What is striking about Fritz’s definition, vis-a-vis Albright’s and Wright's discussion, is what is
missing, namely, archaeology’s purpose to make understandable Israel's faith and scriptures.
Fritz does not deny the usefulness of “biblical archaeology” to biblical studies, but denies its
potential to be used apologetically or as a way to illustrate the biblical record.

Whether under a new or old title, archaeology in Palestine has achieved autonomous
status as a discipline. No longer the canvas upon which Bright could reconstruct Israel’s history
and faith from primarily a biblical perspective, archaeological research has developed, in
principle, its own depiction of “Israel’s” past in Palestine, with only (at most) minimal reference
to the biblical witness. Not unrelated is the notable shift from an almost exclusive concern with
chronology and the monumental remains of large sites—particularly those associated with the
biblical traditions—to a primary focus on smaller sites and the kind of remains that yield
valuable information about everyday life. In the last three decades, archaeologists and surveyors
have detected hundreds of Iron I farmsteads, hamlets, and villages” throughout Palestine,
including the Transjordan.° Indeed, the data have shown that the majority of the population of
Palestine lived in rural areas, rather than in urban centers. Hence, Bright was at least half right in
his observation that early Israel was a “nation of small farmers” (3.223).

‘As archaeology has become an independent field of inquiry, so there has been less
reliance on the biblical witness in matters of historical reconstruction. Given its selective and
theological tendencies, the biblical text cannot be regarded as an objective, let alone sufficient,
account of Israel's past. Hotly debated by both skeptics and defenders in recent years, the
precise extent to which the Bible can provide the historian useful information remains an open
question.” As a result, Bright has been

“Volkmar Fritz, An Introduction to Biblical Archaeology (JSOTSup 172; Sheffield: Sheffield
Academic Press, 1994), p.12.

*See ibid, p.221.

® Elizabeth Bloch-Smith and Beth Alpert Nakhai, “A Landscape Comes to Life: The Iron I
Period, (Near Eastern Archaeology, 62 [1999], p.67). This article represents the latest attempt to
reconstruct the history of early Iron I Palestine on the basis of archaeology with only occasional
reference to the biblical texts.

7 On the skeptical side, see, e.g., Philip R. Davies, In Search of “Ancient Israel’ (JSOT :Sup 148;
Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1995); John Van Seters, In Search of History in the Ancient World
and the Origins of Biblical History (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983), Mare Zvi Brettler, The
Creation of History in Ancient Israel (New York: Routledge, 1996); Keith W. Whitelam, “Recreating the
History of Israel” (JSOT, 35 [1986], pp.45-70); idem, The Invention of Ancient Israel: The Silencing of
Palestinian History (New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1996). On the positive side, see Baruch
Halper, “Erasing History: The Minimalist Assault on Ancient Israel” (BARev, 11/6 [1995], pp.26-35,
41); idem, The First

