AN UPDATE IN THE SEARCH OF ISRAEL'S HISTORY 467

frequently accused of simply retelling the biblical narrative in the language of history.” Such
debates are, of course, nothing new, but they have demonstrated in the face of mounting
extrabiblical evidence that the Bible can no longer be considered a privileged, even primary,
resource in the task of historical reconstruction. Rather, the biblical witness is for the historian
one source among many to be subjected to critical scrutiny, a stance with which Bright himself
was in agreement, at least in principle.”

On the one hand, the Bible is no raw artifact. The so-called historical books (Joshua—2
Kings), for example, are themselves a reconstruction of Israel s past. On the other hand, the
biblical witness is not an artificial construct, the product only of its authors’ fanciful
imagination. Both skeptics and Albrightians alike recognize the folly of adopting one extreme or
the other in the task of historical reconstruction. In his critical confidence in the historical
texture of the biblical tradition, Bright placed himself firmly on one side of the divide between
those who place little historical worth on the biblical traditions and those who find them
essentially trustworthy. Yet Bright claimed that scripture, subjected to the critical tools of the
historian, needed no special pleading (3.68). For all historians of Israel s past, the Bible remains,
at the very least, a valuable resource, one among many, for identifying Israelite perceptions of
ethnic and religious identity. But the perennial question remains, how early and to what extent
do these perceptions identified in the sacred literature apply to ancient (i.e., preexilic) Israel?

Related to the transformation of archaeological research has been the move toward
incorporating anthropological and social-scientific methods for reconstructing Israel's past.'”
Indeed, the fuse that lit the explosion of such methods was the monumental work of Norman
Gottwald,” which Bright had little use for except as a qualified defender of Mendenhall’s model
of an internal conquest.'? Yet the rise of anthropological and sociological study has effectively
filled a gap present in most historical treatments of ancient Israel, namely, the sociocultural
processes and

The Hebrew Bible and History (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1988), esp. Bp98, 205-278
For a helpful collection of essays on the debate, see /srael’s Past in Present Researc
Israel Historiography, ed. V. Philips Long (SBTS 7;Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 1908),

*Sce, e.g., Lester L. Grabbe’s critique that Bright, among others, has written the history of Judah
in the early Persian period by “lightly paraphrasing the book of Ezra” (Grabbe, “Reconstructing History
from the Book of Ezra,” in Second Temple Studies: 1. Persian Period, ed. Philip R. Davies [JSOTSup
117; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1991], p.105n. 1).

” E.g., Bright, 1.61. Most representative is the deconstructive position taken by Neils Peter
Lemche, who regards the biblical narrative, owing to its deuteronomistic overlay, as merely a “secondary
source,” in contrast to the primary evidence gained from con-temporary extrabiblical sources (The
Israelites in History and Tradition (Library of Ancient Israel; Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1998},
pp.30, 43).

'©'Sce the synthesis of this line of research in Paula M. McNutt, Reconstructing the Society of
Ancient Israel (Library of Ancient Israel; Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1999).

"Norman K. Gottwald, The Tribes of Yahweh; A Sociology of the Religion of Liberated Israel,
1250-1050 B.C.E. (Maryknoll, N.Y.: Orbis Books, 1979).
12 See Bright, 3.137n. 76.

