468 A History OF ISRAEL — APPENDIX

structures that gave shape to the communities of the biblical world. No longer limited to matters
of chronology and the conscious actions of individuals, historical inquiry has expanded to
include forces and processes that lie behind the less “dramatic’ aspects of ancient history (e.g.,
technological adaptation, economic development, the social role of women, and the distribution
of political power). In short, the utilization of social scientific and anthropological theories has
done much to supplement the kind of historical reconstruction that even Bright himself
practiced, while also revising many of his conclusions.

Such newly developed foci of research, however, were not alien to Bright's own
historical reflections and method. Like his successors in the field, Bright himself was primarily
interested in what defined Israel as a community in a land shaped and ravaged by innumerable
social forces, from political and economic to religious. By employing the results of archaeology
and comparative study, Bright aimed to broaden the horizons of Israel's past (3.44). Such a
move has also been taken up in various ways by the newer models of historical research.

Space cannot accommodate even a superficial survey of the recent developments that
have emerged during the last two decades of research. One thing has not changed: the field is as
fraught with friction and controversy today as it was in Bright’s day. For the purpose of this
appendix, it is best to conclude Bright’s text-book with a brief treatment of those periods of
Israelite history in which Bright himself was primarily engaged namely, Israel's prehistory and
origin(s), as well as its transition to monarchy.

A. ISRAEL'S "PREHISTORY

The importance (and hope) that Bright placed upon the Ebla Archives for dating the
patriarchs has so far proved ill-founded. The tablets remain difficult to decipher, and initial
reports of direct links between them and the Bible have been shown to be erroneous.
Approximately 80 percent of the texts are administrative and economic in nature. Ebla research
is still in its infancy, and the so-called historical texts of this corpus are yet to be published. No
longer able to wait, Bright made a some-what desperate gamble (and lost) in suggesting possible
links between obscure Eblaite references and personal and geographical names found in
scripture. Most recent treatments of the history and culture of Ebla have avoided establishing
any connection with biblical history whatsoever.'? Ebla remains merely a Syrian city-state
among other Early Bronze civilizations of the Fertile Crescent, predating Israel’s history by at
least a millennium.'*

13 See the numerous articles produced so far by the Center for Ebla Research (Eblaitica: Essays
on the Ebla Archives and Eblaite Language, 3 vols, ed. Cyrus H. Gordon [Winona Lake: Eisenbruans,
1987-1992] ). Any correspondence between Israel's “prehistory” and Eblaite influence is limited to
linguistic matters.

‘Lucia Milano, “Ebla: A Third-Millennium City-State in Ancient Syria,” in Civilizations of the
Ancient Near East, ed, Jack Sasson, et al (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1995), pp.1219-1230 of
vol. 2.

