AN UPDATE IN THE SEARCH OF ISRAEL'S HISTORY 469

While Bright began to loosen his dating for the patriarchs or ancestors of Israel in his
third edition, scholarship since then has undermined the fundamental arguments for a Middle
Bronze or early Late Bronze Age context for Abraham. Following Albright, Bright tied the
wandering patriarchs to widespread “Amorite” movements in the early second millennium B.C.
That the Amorites were responsible for the collapse of urban civilization in Syria-Palestine at
the end of the Early Bronze Age has been seriously questioned. Such disruption is more likely
attributable to internal factors such as overpopulation, drought, famine, or some combination
thereof that exhausted the material and social resources necessary to maintain an urban way of
life. The “Amorite hypothesis,” thus, remains exactly that.

More significant for Bright, however, were the allegedly distinctive customs of the
second millennium evidenced in Nuzi and Mari. Yet continued research has disputed many of
these parallels, as Bright himself was well aware in his third edition.'° Moreover, the patriarchal
names and their customs have been shown to be operative in the ancient Near East well into Iron
Age II. As evident in the third edition, Bright’s argument for the antiquity of the patriarchal
traditions increasingly relied upon the biblical witness, which registers marked differences
between patriarchal custom and “later” (from the narratives standpoint) legal and cultic
practice. But a Middle Bronze Age dating is by no means a necessary conclusion even on such
internal grounds. The fact that the biblical traditions identify the patriarchs with the much later
Arameans—not to mention recount them having contact with the Philistines!—casts serious
doubt on a Middle or Late Bronze Age origin for the patriarchs. The most that can be said is that
the patriarchal narratives reflect the self-understanding of an Israel that considered itself
ethnically distinct in the land. Indeed, most recent studies of the “religion of the patriarchs” have
largely bracketed out the question of dating Israel’s “ancestors.” '®

As the historicity of the patriarchal traditions has been put into question, so has, not
surprisingly, the exodus event. The problem of the exodus, however, runs much deeper than the
issue of dating. Its very occurrence has been questioned. Was Israel essentially allochthonous,
that is, an outside people, or a community indigenous to Canaan? Already anticipated in Bright’s
revisions, recent accounts of Israel's origins have stressed the latter view. Yet the simple fact
remains: archaeology can neither confirm nor disconfirm the deliverance of a band of Asiatic
slaves from Pharaoh’s

' Thomas L. Thompson, The Historicity of the Patriarchal Narratives (BZAW 133; Berlin: de
Gruyter, 1974); John Van Seters, Abraham in History and Tradition (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1975).

16 J. Maxwell Miller and John H. Hayes all but ignore the patriarchal period in their textbook,
History of Ancient Israel and Judah (Philadelphia: Westminster John Knox, 1986). See R.W.L. Moberly,
The Old Testament of the Old Testament: Patriarchal Narratives and Mosaic Yahwism (OBT;
Minneapolis: Fortress, 1992), pp.117, 191-98, who in principle eschews historical judgments yet
cautiously suggests that patriarchal religion is a precursor to Mosaic Yahwism; and Augustine Pagou,
The Religion of the Patriarchs (ISOTSup 277; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1998), who
characterizes the patriarchal religion as family oriented and based on a seminomadic lifestyle coexistent
with the indigenous cult,

