470 A History OF ISRAEL — APPENDIX

mighty hand. The most that historians have been able to do is to identify historical analogies and
indirect evidence from the extrabiblical sources that would suggest a precedent or possible
setting for an event like the exodus.'” Yes, Semites and other minority groups were known to
have immigrated into Egypt during times of economic necessity and even risen to positions of
prominence in the Egyptian court.'* Several of the Anastasi Papyri attest to such traffic at the
border between Egypt and Sinai (see ANET, 258-259). Indeed, an escape of two slaves into the
Sinai wilderness is recorded in Anastasi V.'” In an ostracon, moreover, reference is made to
‘Apiru engaged in construction work at the city of Pi-Ramesses, the new capital of Ramesses
117° Consequently, the possibility remains that during the international upheaval that marked the
close of the Late Bronze Age certain Asiatics from Egypt immigrated into Palestine whose
identity eventually shaped Israel’s legacy in the land.

B, ISRAEL S ORIGINS

Reconstructing Israel’s origins remains the most controversial and complex issue of
historical inquiry into Israel’s past. For Bright, Israel's origins were definitive of Israel's
identity. Such an identification is no longer held by many scholars today. If the biblical witness
is more a product or “invention” of the late exilic and Persian periods than a deposit of various
traditions that reach back into Israel’s very origins, as some claim, then there is no reason to
assume any degree of continuity between early “Israel,” if one can even apply the designation,
and the Israel of the restoration, indeed, of Judaism.”' As the evolution of Bright’s textbook
already began to anticipate, the archaeological picture of Israel's occupation of the land yields a
much different picture from that portrayed in Joshua and even Judges.

Notably lacking in Bright’s textbook, but prominently featured in many recent
reconstructions, is significant attention to the variegated nature of Palestine’s landscape,
including topography, trade routes, and climate.”* More than simply a land bridge between
Egypt to the southwest and Anatolia and Mesopotamia to the north

17 See A. Malamat, “The Exodus: Egyptian Analogies,” in The Exodus: The Egyptian Evidence,
eds, Emest S. Frerichs and Leonard H. Lesko (Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 1997), pp.15-26. For a
compelling yet unavoidably speculative defense of the exodus, see James K. Hofiieier, Israel in Egypt:
The Evidence for the Authenticity of the Exodus Tradition (New York/Oxtord: Oxford University Pr
1996). Much more skeptical are W. G. Dever, “Is There Any Archaeological Evidence for the Exodu
and James Weinstein, “Exodus and Archaeological Reality,” in The Exodus: The Egyptian Evidence,
pp.67-86, 87-104, respectively.

18 The 1986 discovery of the new tomb near Saqqara has yielded evidence of a vizier with
Semitic background (“Aper-EI”) who served Amenhotep III and IV (Akhenaten). See the discussion in
Hoffimeier, /srael in Egypt, p.94.

19 See Malamat, “The Exodus,” pp.20-22.

20 Ibid., 18.

21 Despite its programmatic nature, Davies, In Search of “Ancient Israel,” puts the issue most
sharply.

22 See, e.g., Miller and Hayes, A History of Ancient Israel and Judah, pp.30-52.

