AN UPDATE IN THE SEARCH OF ISRAEL'S HISTORY 471

and east, Palestine features significant geographical variations in terrain, elevation, soil, and
vegetation, in short, a harsh environment * As a land of contrasts, the terrain was not conducive
for the swift emergence of a socially unified people. On the positive side, the physical
environment afforded the local population a degree of autonomy and political isolation. To his
credit, Bright laid greater stress on Israel's heterogeneous origins in his later editions. The
geography of the land confirms this, and the sociocultural landscape, as reconstructed by
archaeologists and anthropologists, enriches this picture all the more.

Although the stela of Mereptah (“Marniptah” in Bright’s editions, now dated to ca.
1207 B.C.), which contains the earliest known reference to “Israel, is still a benchmark in recent
reconstructions, questions remain about what it can tell us about the history of the people to
which it refers, Is Memeptah’s “Israel” a socioethnic entity or simply a territory within
Canaan?” If the former, does it designate a nomadic tribal entity or a sedentary group? The
Egyptian determinative sign for people, which occurs in conjunction with the word “Israel” in
the stela, is nonspecific, although it does preclude any sense of nation or city-state status, as one
finds with the other geographical references (i.e., Ashkelon, Gezer, and Yanoam). All in all, the
stela prompts more questions than answers.”* The most that can be said is that the term “Israel”
suggests an awareness of ethnic differentiation from the other inhabitants of Canaan.”* A series
of Karnak battle reliefs, formerly attributed to Ramses II, are now thought to depict Merneptah's
military successes. Frank Yurco has argued that at least one panel depicts “Israelite” warriors,
lending further credence to the existence of a social entity called “Israel,” indistinguishable in
appearance, however, from the Canaanites.”” Moreover, the Merneptah stela can no

* For a detailed survey particularly of the landscape and climate of the central hill country, see
David C. Hopkins, The Highlands of Canaan: Agricultural Life in the Early Iron Age (SWBAS. 3:
Sheffield: Almond, 1985), pp.53-108.

24 Gasta W. Abistrém, for example, argues that the name “Israel” in the stela refers to a region
rather than to a people (Who Were the Israelites [Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 1986)], pp.37-40).

25 Bright himself was not quite sure what to make of it (1.104; 3.114).

26 Kenton L. Sparks, Ethnicity and Identity in Ancient Israel: Prolegomena to the Study of
Ethnic Sentiments and Their Expression in the Hebrew Bible (Winona Lake: Eisenbrauns, 1998), pp.107-
108,

*’ Frank J. Yurco, “3,200-Year-Old Picture of Israelites Found in Egypt” (BARev, 16/5 [1990],
pp.20-38; idem, “Memeptah’s Canaanite Campaign and Israel’s Origins.” in Exodus: The Egyptian
Evidence, pp.27-55. See also Lawrence Stager, “Forging an Identity: The Emergence of Ancient Israel”
in The Oxford History of the Biblical World, ed. Michael D. Coogan (Oxford / New York: Oxford
University Press, 1998) p.125, who sees the Egyptian determinative sign designating “a different kind of
polity” from the city-states referenced in the stela. If a Karnak relief, damaged as it is, does depict
Israelite warriors, then it likely precludes, according to Yurco, any association with the shasu—another
seminomadic group attested in Egyptian New Kingdom texts as living in the southern Transjordan. But
cf. Donald B. Redford, ‘The Ashkelon Relief at Kamak and the Israel Stela,” (IEJ, 36 [1986], pp.188-
200); Anson Rainey, “Can You Name the Panel with the

