INTRODUCTION — 3

Semitic philology and Palestinian archaeology after marshaling the necessary wherewithal to
resume his studies at Johns Hopkins, all the while pastoring the Catonsville Presbyterian
Church in Baltimore.

In 1940, Bright completed the doctoral degree with his dissertation, “The Age of King
David: A Study in the Institutional History of Israel.”'° A position was waiting for him at
Union, where, upon graduation, he was appointed to the Cyrus H. McCormick Chair of
Hebrew and Old Testament Interpretation, which he held from 1940 until his retirement. His
successful teaching career was interrupted only once, when he was granted leave to serve as a
chaplain in the U.S. Army during the Second World War (1943-46). Bright’s teaching career
was as productive as it was influential. Remaining at Union Theological Seminary for his
entire career, Bright achieved international renown as a scholar, teacher, and preacher.'' Bright
retired in 1975 and died on March 26, 1995, in Richmond.

It was roughly at the midpoint of his teaching career that Bright completed the first
edition of A History of Israel (1959) , which he dedicated to Albright. It had been a vocational
assignment of sorts. Under the initiative of Wright and Albright, Westminster Press invited
Bright to develop a history textbook aimed at theological students. Bright's first inclination
was to decline. At the time, he considered himself not so much a historian per se as a
theologian committed to the life of the church. But through Albright’s encouragement, Bright
reluctantly accepted the task, and he began it by developing a prolegomenon, Early Israel in
Recent History Writing (1956; hereafter cited as El).'? Both this work and the textbook,
published three years later, reflect his mentor’s stamp. Nevertheless, what is distinctive about
A History can be attributed only to Bright. As he would admit thirty-one years later: “I never
grew away from Albright but added other things. I added an interest in biblical theology. ®

B. METHOD

_ In his Early Israel, Bright sought a method that could yield a “satisfying picture” of
Israel's early history (EI, 12) . Such a picture had to take into account Israel’s faith as a socially
determining force in its historical identity:

[W] hat is it that made Israel Israel? What made her different from her neighbours? . . . It
was not language, not habitat, not historical experience alone, not material culture—but
faith. Israel was a people who became a people precisely because of her faith. The history of
Israel, therefore, is

10. See also Bright, “The Age of King David: A Study in the Institutional History of Israel”
(Union Seminary Review, 53 [1942] pp.87-109).

11 Fora list of Bright’s published works and lectures up until his retirement, see
“Bibliography,” Interpretation, 29 (1975), pp.205-208.

12 Bright’s first major monograph was The Kingdom of God: The Biblical Concept and Its
Meaning for the Church (New York/Nashville: Abingdon-Cokesbury, 1953), a nontechnical yet
historically sensitive theological work.

13 Quoted from Noll, “Looking on the Bright Side,” p.3n. 10.

