472 A HIsTorY OF ISRAEL— APPENDIX

longer be employed as marking a decisive terminus ante quem, or latest possible dating, for
Israel’s occupation of the land, as was done in the original conquest models.** It is certainly
possible that Merneptah’s “conquest” of “Israel” in Canaan actually occurred prior to the major
wave of settlements in the central hill country in the early Iron I period. This would suggest that
a “pre-Mosaic” or “proto-Israelite” group was flourishing in Canaan to the extent that it could
muster significant resistance against the Egyptian military, all prior to significant settlement of
the land.

The archaeological evidence continues both to inform and confound the task of
reconstructing Israel s past. Although there is evidence of some urban destruction at the end of
the Late Bronze Age and into Iron Age I, there is little correspondence to the biblical account.
As Bright conceded early on, cities such as Heshbon, Arad, Hebron, Gibeon, Jericho, and Ai
have not yielded signs of occupation in the Late Bronze Age. The Albrightian solution to Ai is
one of convenience, and the biblical account of the conquest of Jericho is clearly a more cultic
than historical narrative in light of the material evidence. In addition, there remains nothing to
indicate that the destruction layers discovered at various urban centers in Palestine are
attributable to a Hebrew conquest. Simply put, the Israelites did not leave their calling card.
Indeed, it is doubtful that the pastoralists who settled the highlands of Canaan were capable of
razing heavily defended walled cities. The Sea Peoples, no doubt, were responsible for some of
the violent conflict that wracked the land.

Gezer and Ashkelon were most likely destroyed by Merneptah. Moreover, the decline of
the Late Bronze Age urban centers was a gradual process, lasting more than a century into the
late twelfth century, rather than confined to the thirteenth.”” No Blitzkrieg was the “conquest,” as
the biblical traditions suggest.

Along with urban decline was a concomitant increase in the number of occupation sites
in the central highlands, the frontiers of Canaanite culture, particularly in the regions of
Ephraim, Manasseh, and the eastern part of Benjamin.*° In terms of material culture,
archaeologists and historians see more continuity than discontinuity between the Canaanite
culture of the Late Bronze Age and the settlements of the Iron Age in the frontier highlands. The
allegedly material indicators of ethnicity identified by Albright such as the “collared-rim” store
jar, the four-room or “pillared” house, the plaster-lined cistern, and agricultural terracing have
been found in regions beyond those commonly associated with Israel in the biblical

Israelites?” (BARev, 17/6 [1991], pp.56-60, 93); see also Frank J. Yurco, “Yurco’s Response,” (BARey,
17/6 [1991], p.61).

28 Again, Bright allows for flexibility on this matter (3.114-115).

29 McNutt, Reconstructing the Society of Ancient Israel, p47.

30 See Israel Finkelstein, “The Emergence of Israel: A Phase in the Cyclic History of Canaan in
the Third and Second Millennia B.C.E..” in From Nomadism to Monarchy: Archaeological and
Historical Aspects of Early Israel, ed. idem and N. Na’aman (Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society,
1994), p.160. See also his comprehensive survey, The Archaeology of the Israelite Settlement (Jerusalem:
Israel Exploration Society, 1988).

