4 — INTRODUCTION

not the history of a Twelve-Clan League, nor of a nation; it is a history of a faith and its
people (El, 114),

Bright was convinced that a full grasp of ancient Israel’s identity required not only a rigorous
historical method but also a sensitivity to Israel’s religion. Only with both could a fully
“satisfying picture” of Israel's origins be reached, one that yielded a comprehensive answer to the
question of Israel’s identity. For Bright, the canvas supporting this “satisfying picture” of Israel's
beginnings consisted of archaeology and comparative study, but the bold strokes had to come
from the hand of one intimately familiar with the biblical witness.

Measuring the credibility of historical reconstruction according to levels of “satisfaction”
may raise serious questions among contemporary historians, Yet Bright was not concerned about
personal or even spiritual contentment in his reconstruction of Israel s past. His concern was the
successful fulfillment of criteria proper to the study of Israel’s history and religion. This focus is
well illustrated in his critical evaluation of two major studies of his day.

Bright finds distinctly unsatisfying the work of the German scholar Martin Noth
(University of Bonn), whose history textbook, given its slavish adherence to traditiohistorical
criticism, he deems hypercritical and narrow in scope.'* Noth’s method, in Bright’s opinion, is
governed by an almost exclusive focus upon the “political and institutional history of Israel” at
the expense of explicating Israel’s faith. “Was not faith too central a moving force in Israel’s
history, even in political events, for it to be relegated to the fringes of the picture without
throwing the picture out of proportion?” Bright pointedly asks (EJ, 35). In the end, Bright comes
close to accusing Noth of a failure of nerve.

In addition, Bright finds equally “unsatisfying” the work of the Jewish scholar Yehezkel
Kaufmann.'* Although Kaufmann offers a “healthy contrast to the nihilism” of Noth’s approach
(El, 64), his monumental work suffers from convoluted logic and little command of the
archaeological evidence. While Bright acknowledges that Kaufmann may be “more correct” than
Noth on many points, Kaufmann’s mode of argumentation is not convincing and his caricature of
German scholarship verges on ad hominem (EI, 71). Kaufmann’s position, Bright claims,
promulgates a literal reading of the historical books, “a virtual ‘ditto’ of the Joshua narrative
accepted at face value” (El, 72). The result is an equally unsatisfving portrait. In

14 M. Noth, Geschichte Israels (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1950). Noth’s text-book
was thoroughly revised in 1956 and has been reprinted numerous times since then. The standard English
translation of the second edition is The History of Israel 2nd ed; New York: Harper & Row, 1960).

15 Y. Kaufmann, The Biblical Account of the Conquest-of Palestine (Jerusalem: The Magnes
Press, 1953). Bright also notes Kaufimann’s untranslated seven volume work, History of the Israelite
Religion: From the Beginning to the End of the Second Temple (Tel Aviv: Institute-Dvir, 1937-48). See
the later English abridgement by Moshe Greenberg, The Religion of Israel: From Its Beginnings to the
Babylonian Exile (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960).

