INTRODUCTION — 5

short, compelling argumentation, familiarity with the material culture of the ancient Near East,
and theological sensitivity are for Bright the essential ingredients for a fully “satisfying picture”
of Israel’s history.

Between skepticism, on the one hand, and literalism, on the other, Bright forges a
methodological middle ground, a commonsense approach that places archaeological research at
the forefront of historical research. Negatively, the results of “Palestinian archaeology” serve as
an “objective control” for determining the historicity of the biblical traditions and a check on the
temptation to use archaeology as an apologetic tool (EZ, 13-15, 29). Archaeology can also help
to determine the real scope of a historical event recorded in scripture.'° A clear case in point is
the incompleteness of the biblical tradition regarding Pharaoh Shishak s invasion described in 1
Kings 14:25-28, which limits the pharaoh’s attack only to Jerusalem. Shishak’s own inscription
at Karnak, however, lists over 150 sites that he conquered. Such extrabiblical evidence “lets us
see [the invasion’s] true scope” (1.214).!” Another example is the Bible’s dismissive and all too
terse account of Omri’s reign (1 Kings 16:23-28). Epigraphic and archaeological evidence
indicates, in fact, Omri’s “great ability” as a ruler (1.222)."

In addition to establishing controls in biblical research, the artifactual evidence can play a
decisive role in distinguishing ancient communities in Palestine: As for evidence of the Israelite
conquest, is archaeology really as helpless as Noth would have it? Can it not tell a Philistine
occupation from an early Israelite one? Or a late Bronze Age Canaanite one from an early Iron
Age one? Can it not tell if there has been an appreciable gap between destruction and re-
occupation? Is archaeology, then, unable to distinguish a destruction of the Amarna Age from
one at the hands of the Philistines, and both from one occasioned by Israel. . . ? (El, 88).

Although overstating the case (see Appendix), Bright fully acknowledges that
archaeology offers only circumstantial evidence, an indirect witness to Israel's past.
Nevertheless, this specialized field of inquiry can play a decisive role in the “balance of
probability, which is all the historian can hope to achieve (El, 83, 89). Furthermore,
archaeology can tip the scales in favor of a trust in the historicity of the biblical tradition as
much as it can cast suspicion. As Bright says in A History, “Surely the Bible need claim no
immunity from rigorous historical method, but

16 See the similar discussion in G. Ernest Wright, Biblical Archaeology (Rev. ed; Philadelphia:
Westminster, 1962), pp.17-18.

17 References to Bright's textbook will be identified only by edition and page number,

18 More complex are the historical reconstructions discussed in the two excursuses that frame
the second half of Bright’s textbook: the campaign (s) of Sennacherib against Jerusalem (1.282-287) and
the chronological ordering of Nehemiah and Ezra (1.375-386). Both discussions showcase the judicious
way by which Bright balances the biblical witness and the comparative evidence.

