6 — INTRODUCTION

may be trusted to withstand the scrutiny to which other documents of history are submitted”
(1.61). Yet Bright cannot count himself as a disinterested party in the act of historical inquiry:
“For my own part, | am not among those who are inclined to sneer at a reverence for Scripture, or
who lightly pooh-pooh the historicity of its traditions” (EI, 28). By self-admission, Bright comes
to the task as a believer, in particular a Presbyterian, one who is neither “gullible nor a
professional sceptic” with regard to the biblical witness (E/, 124).

I am not among those who feel that the historian, out of devotion to some sacred cow of
objectivity, is forbidden to inject [one’s] own theological convictions into his [or her] work,
provided he [or she] does so at the right times and in the right way, But history and theology
must be kept separate lest both historical event and theological interpretation of that event be
placed on the same plane. If these two are confused, the historian will begin to write history, as
it were, from the side of God, and God himself will tend to become a datum of history (EJ, 29-
30; italics added).

Although the historian must confine himself or herself to “human events” (1.68),
theological reflection has an appropriate place in historical study, if delineated with care. Bright s
method is marked by a concerted attempt to hold together and mutually relate, without confusing,
history and theology. On the one hand, Israel’s history is, inter alia, a history of its faith or
religion. On the other hand, Old Testament theology is primarily a theology of events, ” that is,
“an interpretation of ... events in the light of faith” (E/, 11).'° Simply (and modestly) put, Bright’s
own method sought in part to determine the “right times” to comment theologically on the course
of Israel’s history, yet not without a measure of circumspection.

C. A HISTORY OF ISRAEL

Bright’s textbook underwent two major revisions following its initial publication in 1959.
The three editions span over two decades’ worth of new discoveries and methodological
refinements in historical research. As Bright willingly integrated new findings while nuancing
and occasionally correcting his original arguments, 4 History evolved significantly from its initial
publication. Before charting its evolution, the basic groundwork of the first edition must be
presented.

1. First Edition (1959). Published the year after Martin Noth’s Geschichte Israels was
translated into English for the first time, the first edition of Bright s textbook

19 Fora similar definition of biblical theology, see G. Emest Wright, “God Who Acts: Biblical
Theology as Recital” (SBT 8: London: SCM, 1952), pp.38-46, 50-58. Wright's approach to theology as
historically defined was subsequently critiqued. See, e.g. Langdon Gilkey, “Cosmology, Ontology, and
the Travail of Biblical Language” (JR, 41 [1961], pp.194-205; James Barr “Revelation Through History in
the Old Testament and in Modern Theology” (Interpretation, 17 [1963], pp.193-205; and especially
Brevard Childs, Biblical Theology in Crisis (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1970), pp.13-96.
