INTRODUCTION ~ 7

vigorously put into practice what was outlined in his Early History. In his foreword, Bright
justifies the historical enterprise theologically: the message of the Old Testament is so bound up
with history that “a knowledge of Israel’s history is essential to its proper understanding” (1.9;
cf. El, 11). Israel’s religion and history, more-over, are inextricably tied to ancient Near Easter
culture. This recognition propels Bright's investigation back to the very origins of recorded
history. Exposing as woefully provincial Noth’s claim that Israel’s history does not properly
begin until the time of the “occupation of the agricultural land of Palestine,”*° Bright reaches
back to the Stone Age in order to set the stage for Israel's emergence. The Prologue of Bright’s
textbook, though “no part of Israel’s history” proper, is integral to his presentation (1.10; cf El,
121).

By probing deep into the shadows of the past to the very dawn of history and beyond,
Bright sets out to counter a “foreshortened perspective” of Israel’s beginnings (1.37). The
temporal extent of Bright’s ambitious presentation is matched by its broad geographical horizon.
This global perspective, in fact, governs much of the textbook’s structure. For every historical
period, Bright invariably begins by recounting the “world situation” or ancient Near Eastern
context before narrowing the scope to Israel's own domain. Such a broadened purview serves not
only to highlight Israel s distinctiveness vis-d-vis the surrounding pagan cultures, but also to
discern a measure of continuity between Israel's religious identity and that of its neighbors,”!
Hidden amid the manifold cultures of the ancient Orient was an unfolding cultural continuum
that began in Mesopotamia—not coincidentally the origin of Israel’s ancestors—and culminated
in Egypt under the heretic king Akhenaton (Amenophis IV), whose Aten cult, a century before
Moses, “was at least something closely approximating a monotheism” (1.100-101). Israel's
ancestors, in short, were not “primitive nomads” with a crude religion (1.17). They were
“latecomers” who had inherited the great intellectual tradition in the ancient Near East.

Beginning with history's dawning, Bright recounts the flowering and passing of various
cultures, noting their interconnections, differences, and conflicts, as well as their respective cultic
and governing institutions. There are no villains in this veritable cavalcade of high civilizations
that came and went, or managed to survive, by the time Israel's ancestors set foot on the scene.
Rather, the variegated cultural landscape sets the necessary backdrop for Israel’s humble
beginnings. On the eve of the “patriarchal age, ” the ancient Orient was in travail: Sumerian
culture had played itself out, Egypt entered into a period of disorder, and life in Palestine was
utter chaos (1.35-37). Thus, “Israel was born into a world already ancient” and exhausted (1.36).

20 Noth, The History of Israel, pS.

21 Bright's Prologue did not serve to set up the religious milieu of the ancient Near East as a foil
to an evangelistic interpretation of Israel’s religion. One need only note the Nuzi and Hittite parallels
Bright cites to demonstrate the antiquity and significance of certain biblical traditions (see below).
