8 — INTRODUCTION

The appearance of Israel's ancestors (“seminomadic wanderers”) constituted for Bright
nothing less than an in-breaking into history, negligible at first, but irreversibly significant in later
centuries (1.41). Despite their traceless appearance on the historical scene, Bright finds that the
biblical profile of the patriarchs perfectly suits the wealth of extrabiblical evidence from the
Middle Bronze Age. The names of the patriarchs are of Northwest-Semitic stock, as found, for
example, among Egyptian lists and the Mari texts. More decisive, certain customs that lie behind
the stories of the patriarchs seem to find their precedent in the Nuzi texts of Hurrian origin.
Consequently, “the patriarchal customs are, in fact, closer to the practice of second-millennium
Mesopotamia than to that of later Israel!"(1.71-72).

Bright, however, is far from employing comparative research as an apologetic tool.
References to camels in the biblical narrative are deemed anachronistic (Gen. 12:16, 24), and
there is scarce evidence to demonstrate that Abraham’s home was Ur in Lower Mesopotamia.
What the comparative evidence does suggest is an Upper Mesopotamian origin for the biblical
patriarchs. Moreover, evidence of an Amorite influx indicates that Abraham and Lot,
accompanied by their wives, did not comprise an isolated family wandering in a hostile land, as
one might infer from a reading of the biblical narrative. Rather, they were heads of sizable clans
searching for a foothold in Canaan (1.68). An aura of historical authenticity, how-ever, can be
discerned from the biblical witness itself: that the religion of the patriarchs is treated in Genesis
as wholly distinct from Mosaic faith precludes the possibility that it is simply a retrojection of
later Israelite belief. Although not identical to YHWH, the “God of the Fathers” is no alien to the
biblical witness: Israel’s heritage of “tribal . . . solidarity between people and God” stems from
the kinship religion of the patriarchs (1.92-93; cf. EJ, 115-120). Given their instrumental role in.
mediating Mesopotamian traditions, Israel's ancestors “stand in the truest sense at the beginning
of Israel’s history and faith” (1.93; EJ, 41-42).

Israel’s proper origins, however, do not take shape until much later. For Bright, Exodus
and Sinai constitute the two pillars of Israel’s core identity. Israel’s advent begins at the end of
the Late Bronze Age, when the power struggle among the empires of the fertile crescent had
“ended with the death or exhaustion of all the contestants,” clearing space, in effect, for Israel to
take root in Palestine (1.106). The soil for Israel's cultivation was variegated: the indigenous
Canaanites and the formerly outsider Amorites, not to mention Indo-Aryan and Hurrian elements,
populated the landscape. All became part of the dominant Canaanite culture. And by no means
were they to be radically distinguished from Israel: ‘The dominant pre-Israelite population was
thus in race and language not different from Israel her-self (1.106).

In Canaan, however, Israel inherited a mixed legacy. On the one hand, Canaan's crowning
achievement was the linear alphabet (1.108). Moreover, Canaanite literature, particularly the vast
epic corpus discovered at Ugarit, displays “many kinships to earliest Hebrew verse” (1.108). On
the other hand, Canaanite religion was “no
