INTRODUCTION — 9
pretty picture”; it embodied an “extraordinarily debasing form of paganism” in the form of the
fertility cult (1.108). Consonant with the biblical witness, Bright considered Canaan the closest
thing to Israel’s cultural enemy.

The timing of Israel’s entrance in Canaan, Bright acknowledges, is a complicated affair.
It begins decisively in the exodus event, which Bright confidently dates to the first half of the
thirteenth century, preceding the archacologically identified destruction layers of several urban
centers in Palestine. The only indirect evidence to Israel's presence in Egypt is the reference to
the Apiru or “state slaves,” among whom “were components of the later Israel” (1.111). On the
other geographical side is the reference to “Israel” in Palestine attested in the “Marniptah” stela
(1.104). Finally, drawing from the archaeological surveys of Nelson Glueck, Bright notes that
Israel’s detour around Edom and Moab (see Numbers 20—21) could not have happened any
earlier than the thirteenth century, despite the Bible's own chronology (1.113). Here is another
case of archaeological evidence exerting control over biblical tradition.

What the archaeological and comparative material lack in providing direct evidence for
an exodus of slaves, the prominence of the various biblical voices more than compensates: “the
Biblical tradition a priori demands belief: it is not the sort of tradition any people would invent!”
(1.110). The same applies to the figure of Moses, “the great founder of Israel’s faith” (1.116).~
Although Bright grants that Yahwism may have had Midianite connections, it was “made into a
new thing [through Moses]. It is with Moses that the faith and history of Israel begin” (1.116).

The biblical witness to the exodus, while neither confirmed nor disconfirmed, does suffer
a partial collision with regard to the conquest of Canaan, Bright acknowledges. Although there is
clear evidence of a thirteenth-century destruction among a few Palestinian cities, two in
particular are problematic for Bright: Jericho and As (et-Tell). Regarding the former, Bright
reserves judgment, since “Late-Bronze Jericho seems to have been so scoured by wind and rain
that little of it is left’ (1.119). Ai also presents a challenge in that any evidence of occupancy
during this period is lacking. Bright’s solution is drawn from Albright’s own conclusion that the
tradition in Joshua 8 had confused Bethel, which exhibits a thirteenth-century destruction layer,
with Ai, both separated by little more than a mile (1.119) . Despite such defensive solutions, the
ambiguity of the archaeological evidence is, Bright acknowledges, also reflected in biblical
tradition. The opening chapter of Judges depicts an incomplete conquest at odds with the
successful Blitzkrieg recounted in Joshua 1—12 (1.122). In addition, “Joshua tells of no conquest
of central Palestine, even though much of the narrative’s scope is lodged in that region (1.123).
That certain “components of Israel” had been in Palestine prior to the conquest suggests that the
exodus group was able to absorb “kindred people” in the area without

22 See also El, pp.52-53, 86, in which Bright specifically counters Noth’s assessment that the
biblical figure of Moses originated from a “grave tradition.”
